When we use Office365, Amazon, or Facebook, we access a world of rich services via a network. Network reliability is paramount for business, science, and government because downtime affects productivity, economic output, and social communication. However, reliability is difficult to achieve in the face of component failure, manual configuration, and the stringent economics of the IT industry.

This project will take first steps towards creating a new field of inquiry, Network Design Automation (NDA). NDA seeks to create computer-aided design (CAD) tools that reduce design effort and increase reliability based on a scientific understanding of network structure. NDA is inspired by Electronic Design Automation (EDA), a $7B industry that underpins the $100B chip industry, and is a vibrant intellectual discipline in its own right.

It builds on the last five years of progress in network verification done by the computer networking community that has already resulted in industry startups. However, existing work in network verification and synthesis primarily focuses on router configuration files in data center networks.

NDA will broaden the agenda to debugging networked systems and to other specialized networks such as rural networks and CDNs.  Specific new tasks include tying application performance to network problems using machine learning, understanding failure logs using Natural Language Processing, creating more controllable routers inspired by hardware boundary scan ideas such as JTAG, rural network design using constraint satisfaction, network scripting to lower the barriers for operators, and data mining to find configuration bugs without a specification. Just as the EDA industry has a suite of tools such as place-and-route, synthesis, and timing verification, the goal of NDA is to produce a set of interconnected tools to construct and manage networks that satisfy formal properties, while minimizing the frequency of failures and reducing recovery time.

Networks have several unique challenges that preclude reusing existing approaches in debugging and synthesis of programs and chips. These include scale (hundreds of thousands of devices and zetabytes of traffic), heterogeneity (devices, protocols, vendors), management complexity (most configuration is still at "assembly" level), rate of evolution (new data centers and service rollouts), and high availability needs (less than 40 minutes per month downtime for "three 9s" availability). Thus, we need better abstractions and tools across the board: languages for modeling topologies, faults, and configurations, and tools for integrated debugging, specification mining, and configuration scripting. NDA will harness interdisciplinary approaches.  Besides a consistent focus on using algorithm search (e.g., SAT solvers for rural topologies), it will leverage data mining (to learn specifications), machine learning (to build associations for debugging), NLP (to mine operator logs), and hardware test (to suggest new router primitives).  NDA will not merely reuse existing mechanisms from these fields (e.g., SAT solvers, K-means) but to exploit domain-specific insights about the structure of modern networks to invent new scalable approaches such as network specific data mining.

NDA will attempt to transform academic, industrial and rural approaches to networking by: 1) partnering with Microsoft and Google, to develop, deploy, and evaluate NDA technology for clouds, (2) working with rural networks in California and Ghana to help deploy topology design and configuration scripting tools, (3) training underpresented minorities by developing tools and workshops.
